the methuselah star better known in
astronomy circles as hd140283
is the oldest star that we know of its
age is estimated to be 14.46
billion years old now that might raise
some red flags
especially if you're familiar with the
big bang theory theme tune our
whole universe was in a hot dance state
then nearly 14 billion years ago
expansion started waiting that's right
we think the universe is
nearly 14 billion years old not 14.46
billion
like hd140283
so that has led a lot of people to ask
the question
is this star older than the universe
itself
no no no hell no absolutely not no
definitely not so in this video i'm
going to explain how we know it's not
older than the universe itself and
explain why us astrophysicists just
don't even think this star's that
interesting
so hd140283 was dubbed the methuselah
star by people
after the character of methuselah in the
bible who apparently lived the ripe old
age of
969 years old the oldest of
anybody in the bible and even that name
has led some massive misconceptions
about the masseuse hd140283 because
it leads people to think that it's the
oldest star
in the universe which it isn't it
probably
isn't even the oldest star in our galaxy
the milky way of
hundreds of billions of stars it's just
the oldest star in sort of our little
backyard of the milky way nearby
to the sun this star is only 200 light
years
away from the sun compared to the
hundred thousand light years
of the entire milky way and that's
because we need to know the distance to
a star
really well to calculate its age in fact
there's three things that you need
to calculate a star's age the first one
is the brightness
measure that fairly easily we just
observe it with a telescope and record
how much light we get from it
the second is the distance which we then
use to get what's called its absolute
brightness
and the third thing is it's metallicity
but we'll get to that in a little bit as
i said we can get the brightness of a
star fairly easily just by observing it
so let's start with how we can get
distance we can do this using something
called parallax for nearby stars this is
how much stars
shift about on the sky as the earth
moves around the sun
on its orbit it's kind of like when you
hold your finger out in front of you and
you close one eye and then you shift and
you can see
like your finger move compared to things
in the background
it's kind of like almost in that analogy
that one eye is like the position of
earth in june whereas one eye
is the position of earth in december now
the closer the star
the bigger the parallax i mean the
bigger the shift compared to the
background stars the further away is it
sort of blends into the background and
the smaller the parallax becomes
until at a certain distance it's
actually too small for us to measure
now the reason we need to know the
distance to a star really well is to
calculate something called the absolute
brightness now we've already measured
the apparent
brightness so how bright that star
appears to us
here on earth but that light will have
been dimmed
due to the distance that it's actually
traveled through
space on its way to us if we know the
distance that it's traveled we can
correct for that and work out what its
absolute brightness would be if you
literally stood right next to it it's
almost like the star's
true brightness rather than the
brightness that we observe it's kind of
like the same thing that you do when
you're crossing a road at night right
you look left and right
and you can see when cars are coming and
you can tell how far away they are based
on
how bright their headlights appear to
you the faint of the headlights further
away the car is the brighter the
headlights the cars right there
all right so we've got the first two
things on our list to be able to
calculate star's age
now we need that last third thing the
metallicity
this is the ratio of the amount of
hydrogen a star has
to the amount of other heavier elements
a star has anything heavier than
hydrogen so yeah
helium lithium beryllium but onwards to
carbon oxygen all the way up
to iron as well astronomers call
anything heavier than hydrogen
a metal which at this point i think is
just to troll
the chemists but that's the way it's
always been so
that's the terminology that we use so
you might be wondering why do we need to
know the methylicity of a star to
pinpoint its age
well think about the very first stars to
have formed in the early universe you
know pretty much
as soon as possible as they could after
the big bang
the universe back then was mostly
hydrogen so
the first stars that will have formed
will have formed from
mostly hydrogen which means their
metallicity i how many
metals they had how many elements beyond
hydrogen would have been
really low those stars were then you
know
through nuclear fusion produced a lot of
helium and then as they
ran out of hydrogen to burn they would
have then started burning to heavier
elements like carbon nitrogen oxygen and
maybe even gone supernova and produced
iron as well that then was
dispersed through space so that the next
generations of stars that we'll have
formed will form from whatever was left
over from that very first generation and
they will have had a slightly higher
metallicity so a higher content of these
heavier elements these metals
and so on and so on and so forth until
like the most recent stars that have
formed will have formed from
an area of space that probably had a
very high metal content from
all the previous generations of stars
that have come before it
producing all those metals along the way
now we measure the metallicity of a star
using its spectrum so if we take the
light from a star and split it through a
prism
and we make a trace of how much light of
each colour
or wavelength we receive when we do that
we can see that there's
colours missing this is the spectrum of
our own
sun for example if you could view every
single rainbow to the same level of
detail
this is what you'd see you'd see these
colors missing and everywhere there's a
color missing is where there's a
specific
element that's absorbed that specific
color of light so from hydrogen and
helium all through sodium oxygen
and all the way to iron the fact that
the sun contains elements as heavy as
iron tells us that it's at least a
third generation star in this area of
the milky way if not
more as well and of course life wouldn't
exist on planet earth either if it was
any earlier of a generation of star
because in the earliest generations of
stars
there just wasn't the heavy elements
that you need for
life to even start so things like carbon
nitrogen oxygen and then obviously the
heavier elements that go into making
rocky planets as well but instead if we
see a spectrum of a star that doesn't
have
the colors missing that correspond to
the heavy elements like iron
and it just has mostly hydrogen and
helium then we know it has to be
very old it has to have formed very
early on
in the universe putting a number on
exactly
how old a star is though once you've
measured its metallicity and its
absolute brightness
is where it starts to get a little bit
difficult because
here is where you have to start modeling
well what brightness do you
expect if you've got a star of a given
metalistic
and a given mass in a given age
so that requires you to know well given
our knowledge of nuclear fusion and the
process that goes on for
turning hydrogen into helium how much
energy do you expect that to give out
and therefore how much light and how
much
of that light actually makes it from the
core of the star where the nuclear
fusion is happening
to the actual surface of the star where
it's then like released
into space as well you know it hasn't
actually been absorbed or interfered
with by all that sort of intervening
material and plasma and heavy elements
that you find
in there and then you've got to know how
that rate of nuclear fusion changes as
your star gets bigger or it gets
smaller and so you have to do this for a
huge range of methodisties
of masses of star of age of star as well
you have to know how it changes as the
star gets
older and once you've got that huge
range of models of
all those different values then you can
say
okay my star i've observed is this
methylistic and this brightness
what's my model best fit for how
old it is and that's how you then put a
number on this
so this is what bonding collaborators
did in 2013 for hd140283 the methuselah
star
they measured a really precise parallax
using the hubble space telescope to get
a distance
use that to get a very accurate absolute
brightness
and then after measuring the metallicity
they could get an age from those models
of 14.46
billion years plus or minus
0.8 billion years that plus or minus 0.8
billion years is what's known as their
uncertainty on the estimate of
that age and it comes from a combination
of lots of different things
the error on your measurement of
parallax and brightness and metallicity
what you've actually made of the star
but then also your uncertainty on the
models as well so
how bright you think a star of a certain
age and mass and metalisty
could be that will vary and you'll have
some uncertainty
on that estimate too all of those
collate together to give you
this plus or minus 0.8 billion years
which means that we kind of know a
ballpark figure
but it could be somewhere in the range
of 13.66 billion years old
to 15.26 billion years old
that's not a precise measurement in
anybody's book right that's
a difference of like two billion years
nearly now compare that with our current
best estimate of the age of the universe
which
obviously also has an uncertainty on it
13.787 plus or minus 0.020
billion years that's a whole 127 million
years of overlap
in our uncertainty on our measurement of
the age of the universe
in the age of hd140283 and so
no this star hd140283 is not
older than the age of the universe and
this is why astronomers don't think
it's that interesting as everyone else
seems to think it is when they first
hear those numbers because we know that
at the end of the day it really is just
a story of
uncertainties and measurement error
which is
a very necessary part of science but
it's not exactly
the fun part of science is it it's
actually the really
boring part of science i guarantee you
show anybody who did a degree in physics
this
table on how to propagate measurement
error
and calculate how they all add up they
will shudder
in horror but not only is this a tale of
the uncertainties on the measurement of
hd140283 it's also a tale of the
measurement of uncertainty on our
estimate of the age of the entire
universe
as well because the hilarious thing is
we've got a couple of different methods
for measuring the age of the universe
and they're giving us completely
different answers that are about a
billion years
apart and what's more is that their
uncertainties
on those measurements are also no longer
overlapping
either this is what's been dubbed the
crisis in cosmology i've talked a couple
of times on this channel about it before
i'll link a video up here
and in the video description below if
you want to know more about that
so hopefully now you understand why
astrophysicists just don't find this
star that interesting ray and why when
its age was first estimated back in 2013
we didn't just like tear up everything
and throw it out of the window because
it really is just a tale of
uncertainties you know we've got around
about the right ballpark figure
we're not precise enough to say exactly
what age it is so no this star is
not older than the universe plus we have
to think about everything
else we know about the universe and our
best theory of how it started
the big bang our whole universe was in a
hot dance thing
so the entire universe was in this hot
dense state essentially everything was
pure energy it was
too hot for mata as we know it so none
of the raw ingredients like
hydrogen that you need to make stars
even
existed yet plus our theory of the big
bang says that
space and time itself were created
when this expansion started so there was
no
before the big bang if
time itself wasn't created until that
expansion
started because the concept of before ie
something
happening earlier in time didn't exist
if time
didn't exist so with the laws of physics
as we understand them it is physically
impossible for anything that's in the
universe
made of stuff that you find in the
to be older than the universe itself
of that we can be certain
before we get to the bloopers a big
thank you to this week's video sponsor
brilliant brilliant is a website and an
app that's built on the principle that
you learn
best by doing they have a huge range of
courses on all
areas of science maths and computer
science you can jump into
and start solving problems their courses
are interactive
and fun and they introduce new concepts
bit by bit so before you know it you've
learned a whole new subject
brilliant has something for everybody
whether you want to start with the
basics or jump into a more in-depth
course on like
quantum computing and they have a really
good astronomy course as well so you can
learn more about the topics in this
video from
the colors of stars and their spectra to
measuring distance
was parallax so if that sounds like
something you'd be up for and you want
to support me
and my channel head to brilliant.org
forward slash dr becky that's
d-r-b-e-c-k-y
and sign up completely for free plus the
first 200 people that go to that link
that's linked down below in the video
description will get
20 off an annual premium subscription
so thank you so much to brilliant for
sponsoring this video and now
roll those bloopers that might raise
some red flags
if you remember the big bang theme tune
the whole universe was in a hot dance
state and nearly 14 billion years ago
expansion started wait
i feel like that song is just like burnt
into every single physicist's brain it's
just part of a molecular structure now
another thing that physicists say to
troll chemists is that you can describe
the entirety of chemistry
in one page worth of quantum mechanics
equations
i'm sorry gimmicks it's just too much
fun
so i don't think that would be described
as a precise measure precise measurement
my sean connery is showing again right
well i think we're done
bad science story unraveling the mystery
that all started with a big bang bang